Maybe time for a hard reset. Hard-ish, anyway.


I keep having vague ideas and then not implementing anything, I think because I've built so much and it's so entrenched. It's very hard to change this very complicated system, and it's exhausting to think about.

The end product will also be exhausting, it's going to be very complex no matter what I do, I think. I just... want a lot.

But, it's hard to move in a new direction when you have concrete blocks made of legacy code glued to your feet.

DNA maybe needs a fundamental overhaul. Marker nodes, places to "start" and "stop", to make calculation more flexible.

Buuuut then again if we have to access this shit all the time aren't we going to end up doing a bunch of O(n) that could be O(1)?

Idk. Idk idk. Thats the whole problem, theres too much I don't know. I don't know what's most important. I don't have a damn sounding board.



want:
	random small changes in code consistently produce SMALL CHANGES in output
	the potential for re-use or pattern forming

	we need to stop creating pre-formed organisms. Things have to be created one organelle at a time.

	Less jumping around. More... idk. Having defined sections that make consistent results.

	It's expensive to do insertions. So... lets not?

	Its chaotic to do indexing based on values at a location. Can we not?

	If we don't jump from location to location we need to basically read from left to right, I think.
	Making very small jumps doesn't work, because you'll end up on an incorrect path.



building the framework is the primary goal, anything after that is just observagtional.

In order to maximize uitility, we want as much emergent complexity as possible.

Modeling this after real bio is beneficial in the sense that we know that there is some system in which it functions, and therfore it is more plausible that we could create a system of our own that works in a similar fashion.

However, becoming too entrenched in ideas that are strictly IRL bio runs the risk of overcomplicating or causing friction for the current system.

We need, for the sake of aesthetic satisfaction, something better than hardcoded functionality with on/off switches. That much is clear.

It does need, in theory, to be able to parallel a lot of irl systems gor the same reason. I want a mirror.

Environment+behavior+genetic code


In order to prevent the excess clunkiness caused by needing to seperately produce and encapsulate DNA to create a new organism, we will include an option to "read the DNA, create an organelle that corresponds to it's internals, and also create a copy of this DNA inside of it"

this works only for single-chromosome organisms, and may cause a lot of organism to be single-chromosome for a long time. I think this is probably just fine, though.

The options we need:

Create copy of DNA
Read DNA and make organelle
Read DNA and make organelle with DNA copy inside of it
Make a DNA copy
Read DNA and make chemical?

Do this inside the current organelle
Do this outside the current organelle
Do this outside the current organelle, and connect it to the organelle



Questions:
How do we do neural net/organelle decision making?
How do we prevent DNA from taking up too much memory?
How do we avoid needing to constantly read DNA (this is expensive!)?

Two of these are optimization! Let's not worry about this yet

We also have ideas for the world, but we don't need to implement them yet.

We are just doing organelle generation right now. Organelles and DNA. And decision making.

An organelle can easily create its own neural net on creation, and then just read that. This makes macro-behavior hard, however.

What's maybe better is to have each organelle have inputs and outputs, with input and output channels. If you're connected to another organelle, you can read its outputs.

reading dna defines your internal nodes. Each organelle is an input layer, an output layer, and nodes. They each have a mini-net. Small number of nodes.

When something attaches, it can affect the behavior of what it attaches to. This could potentially allow for mind-control viruses, but evolving away from susceptibility to this is also possible.

The virus would also have to find the right location to lock on to!!! Similar to irl.

Single-celled organisms could create 'memory' by changing the composition of their internal solution? Maybe?

Overall this can happen very fast. I think this is good.

....What order will they activate in? That's relevant.

We could have all of them read, and then have all of them write/act. That makes a certain amount of sense. It's very reliable.

I like this. :3


Ok. What do cells do?

-Make a connection
-Break a connection
-Read DNA/synthesize something
...Move???? ugh. Idk.
Random floating and brownian motion has been good enough for a lot of things thus far.
I'd rather if movement evolved. Therefore: 
-Increase or decrease "intertia"
-Increase or decrease "desired" distance from connected entity.
-Pull a connected something inside, if it is smaller than you are
-Spit out something that is inside, either with or without a connection






Ok.

We have a plan of action for 
-what we want the organelle creation to look like
-what we want reproduction to look like
-what we want decision-making to look like


Now we need to put that information into a code.


We aren't building this from chemistry up, which I think is a good thing. 


Mod numbers are still useful for randomly deciding things like inside vs outside and connected vs not
We could have a pre-defined number of nodes in the net, which might make it run faster.
A read-all-then-write-all approach allows us to have well-defined cyclic relationships in the nodes.
We can have everything build as a look-back
All nodes+outputs look backwards at their inputs, and write down what they see
Then, they all do math and adjust their output number.

We can also... maybe... just build cells as a collection of booleans....??? 

The BIG thing is.. I think.... defining where cells look to read their DNA. 
And making sure they all have 'markers', and that the DNA does too





ALLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLLRIGHT its 2023-06-15 and we're back at it

The more I thought about this, the more I realized that it would never be what I wanted it be if it had any kind of overarching structure.

Anything centralized leads to arbitrary requirements and patterns that didn't arise from anything else. The only way to truly embrace emergent complexity is to force
EVERY SINGLE PIECE to be solitary and acting on its own. Conway's game of life is a perfect example of this. We want conways game/hell of sand with juuuust enough complexity to form life.

The baseline requirement: DNA is an object in the simulation. It can be acted upon by other objects.

I knew I needed other objects, and membranes are an obvious one. They are so flexible and interesting, they can provide a lot of nuance with relatively little complexity, and 
mirror actual life quite nicely.
I took a while trying to figure out what a membrane should DO, and I still dont have all the details worked out.
However, I realized that a ring-shaped structure of linked nodes would be very useful.
Nodes (which are other objects contained within the membrane) can swap places with each other, giving a computationally cheap concept of adjacency.
It also provides a HUGE amount of information density, since every single different ordering of the ring will give potentially different results.
My other thought is that there would be two extra nodes that represent the membrane itself. When the membrane divides, it splits at these points and each half
joins itself at the loose ends, forming two smaller rings. Because the ordering of the ring can change in any way, this allows the division of the membrane to 
include any subset of the internal components (even none of them at all!)
We also have the option to do this with multiple internal nodes... but we don't HAVE to so for now we stick with 2.

Then I got stuck trying to figure out what else we needed.

After some time, I realized that since reading and copying the DNA are both fundamental functions required for this simulation, and since we
are using adjacency as a way to affect the behaviour of objects inside a membrane, it made sense to have a seperate object that reads DNA and creates more objects.
This allows us to have gene-gene interactions (one DNA is read, creates an object that reads a second DNA, creates an object that reads the first DNA in a different place)
as well as steric hinderance (if there is something immovable between the reader and the DNA then it cant read the DNA!)
It would be possible to create two different objects that read DNA and copy the DNA or create a different object respectively, but I can't think of a reason why this would be
necessary or beneficial? So.... I'm thinking we'll create a DNA polymerase + ribosome combindation thingy that I'll just call 'synthase'. This term usually refers to an ensyme
that catalyses a reaction that joins two molecules together rather than something that reads DNA, but this object is going to be making stuff and this term is very generic, so
it seems fine to me.

Once we have DNA, Membranes, and Synthase, the last things we are obviously lacking are
1. Movement
2. Binding objects together

To this end, I think that we should have a 'polymer'. This will be something that has a well-defined length and can stretch or shrink.
It will also be harder to displace if it is longer, and easier to displace if it is shorter, allowing a lengthened polymer to be used as an 'anchor' or 'paddle'.
In theory I think this allows movement to occur? We'll see lmao

SO. All told;
DNA
Membrane
Synthase
Polymer

And hopefully... thats all we need?


All of these should really descend from Organelle...
Oh boy, here I go hacking again.